\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c -*-auto-fill-mode-*-
@c -*-flyspell-mode-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename vamos.info
@settitle Vamos
@set VERSION 0.7.0
@set EDITION 0.5
@set UPDATED 15 January 2012
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Applications
@direntry
* Vamos: (vamos).               An automotive simulator
@end direntry

@ifinfo
Vamos Automotive Simulator, by Sam Varner.

This file documents the Vamos libraries and application.

Copyright 2001--2012 Sam Varner

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Vamos Automotive Simulator
@subtitle @value{EDITION}, version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author

@page
@c Move the copyright notice to the bottom of the page.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2001--2008 Sam Varner

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".

@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, Let's Go, (dir), (dir)
@top Vamos Automotive Simulator

Sam Varner @email{snick-a-doo@@comcast.net}

Vamos is an automotive simulation framework with an emphasis on
thorough physical modeling and good C++ design. Vamos includes a
real-time, first-person, 3D driving application.

This file documents Vamos version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Let's Go::                    Getting on the road.
* Controls::                    Keyboard and joystick settings.
* Dashboard::                   On-screen information.
* Cars::                        Choosing and creating cars.
* Tracks::                      Choosing and creating tracks.
* Worlds::                      Specifying environments.
* Units::                       A note about units of measure.
* Code Reference::              The inner workings.
* Building Vamos::              Downloading and compiling the program.
* Copying::                     The GNU Free Documentation License.
* Concept Index::               An item for each concept.
@end menu

@c=============================================================================
@node Let's Go, Controls, Top, Top
@chapter Let's Go
@cindex driving
The @file{vamos} application lets you experience the simulation first
hand.  Its main purpose is to be a test bed for the libraries.  It is
not intended to be a polished end-user application.  However, you can
drive on a number of tracks and try to beat your best time.  Or you
can just have fun driving on, and over, the ragged edge.

@section Getting Started
When you start the application with no arguments you will be looking out
over the hood of your car, down the front straight of a simple,
fictitious circuit.  Give the car a little gas and shift into first by
pressing and releasing the first joystick button.  The clutch is engaged
gradually, so you will need to increase the throttle to keep the engine
revs up.  If you stall, shift back to neutral (second button) and press
the @key{s} key to restart the engine.  @xref{Controls}.

Once you get going you will need to shift into second.  When you press
the button to shift, the clutch is disengaged.  It is re-engaged when
you release the button.  You will need to back off the throttle when
the clutch is disengaged in order to make your shifts smooth.  As with
shifting to first gear, the clutch is engaged gradually, although much
more quickly.

The first turn on the circuit is a sharp left-hander at the top of a
hill.  This is a good place to practice sliding the car through a
turn.  You will probably hear the tires slide as you enter the turn.
Don't worry, the tires actually have @emph{more} grip when they're
sliding a little.  However, you do lose some directional stability.
So you point the nose a little toward the center of the turn and use
the throttle to hold the car in the turn.  If you slide the car more
than a little, you will lose grip and probably find yourself in the
gravel.

When driving on the edge, the throttle and brake do as much as the
steering wheel to control the trajectory of the car.  In general,
accelerating tends to straighten out the car and braking tends to turn
the car more.  To demonstrate this, try backing off the throttle
midway through a turn.  You'll find that the back end steps out a
little causing the car to turn in.

@section Robot Cars
You can race against computer-controlled opponents.  Use the @command{o}
option with a numeric argument to race against other cars.  Use the
@command{d} if you just want to watch.

@node Controls, Dashboard, Let's Go, Top
@section Controls
The car can be driven with a joystick, keys, or even a mouse.  A
joystick is highly recommended.

Keys, buttons, and joystick axes are mapped to functions in an XML
file in the data directory (usually
@file{/usr/local/share/vamos/controls}).  By default the file
@file{default-controls} is used.  You can specify a different file
with the @command{-a} or @command{--controls=} options.  The default
control bindings are as follows:

@cindex controls
@multitable @columnfractions .15 .25 .60
@item Key            @tab Stick         @tab Action
@item @key{Up}*      @tab Forward       @tab Throttle.
@item @key{Down}*    @tab Backward      @tab Brake.
@item @key{Left}*    @tab Left          @tab Turn left.
@item @key{Right}*   @tab Right         @tab Turn right.
@item @key{Insert}*  @tab Button-1*     @tab Shift up.
@item @key{Delete}*  @tab Button-2*     @tab Shift down.
@item @key{Home}*    @tab Button-3*     @tab Clutch.
@item @key{a}        @tab   @tab Place the car back at the starting line.
@item @key{r}        @tab   @tab Place the car back on the road.
@item @key{s}        @tab   @tab Start the engine after a stall.
@item @key{f}        @tab   @tab Fill the fuel tank.
@item @key{c}        @tab   @tab Reload the car definition file.
@item @key{t}        @tab   @tab Reload the track definition file.
@item @key{p}        @tab   @tab Pause the application.
@item @key{q}        @tab   @tab Exit the application.
@item @key{F9}       @tab   @tab Cycle through the views.
@end multitable

The `*' symbol indicates that the action is performed gradually after
the key or button is pressed.

When shifting, pressing the key or button causes the clutch to be
disengaged before the new gear is selected.  Releasing the button
releases the clutch.  The clutch is engaged slowly when shifting from
neutral, and more quickly for other gears.  The clutch is always
disengaged quickly.

@section Control File Format
Here's the format of a controls file.

@example
@group
<controls name="Name">
  <!-- Key Binding -->
  <bind>
    <function>function name</function>
    <key>k</key>[<up|down/>]
    [<time>t</time>]
  </bind>

  <!-- Button Binding -->
  <bind>
    <function>function name</function>
    <button>b</button>[<up|down/>]
  </bind>

  <!-- Axis Binding -->
  <bind>
    <function>function name</function>
    <axis>a</axis>
    [<factor>f</factor>]
    [<offset>o</offset>]
    [<minimum>m</minimum>]
  </bind>
</controls>
@end group
@end example

The @code{function} tag gives the name of the function to bind.  Any
member funciton of Gl_Car_World that takes two double arguments and
returns a bool can be bound.  The case of the name inside the
@code{function} tag must match the actual function's name, and
underscores must be replaced with single spaces.

The @code{down} tag binds the function to a key (or button) press;
@code{up} binds it to a key release.  If neither is specified, the
function is bound to a key press.

The @code{time} tag sets how long it takes for setting to be ramped up
to its target value.  It is used for controling continuous values,
like throttle, from the keyboard.  The default time is 0.

For joystick axes, vaules range from -1 to 1.  This number is
multiplied by the value in the @code{factor} tag and then the value in
the @code{offset} tag is added.  The result is clipped at
@code{minimum}.  The defaults are 1, 0, 0, respectively.

@subsection Bindable Functions
These are the functions that can be bound to controls.

@table @code
@item pause
Pause the simulation.

@item quit
Quit the program.

@item cycle view
Change the point-of-view from car to trackside to overhead.

@item read car
Read the car definition file.

@item read track
Read the track definition file.

@item read world
Read the world definition file.

@item restart car
Put the car at the starting line.

@item reset car
Put the car back on the track.

@item fill tank
Fill the car's gas tank.

@item gas
Operate the throttle.

@item brake
Operate the brakes.

@item steer
@itemx steer left
@itemx steer right
Operate the steering wheel.  The 'steer left' and 'steer right'
functions are useful for binding to keys.

@item shift up
@itemx shift down
Select an adjacent gear, except when in neutral.

@item shift up disengage
@itemx shift down disengage
Select an adjacent gear and operate the clutch, except when in neutral.

@item initial shift up
@itemx initial shift down
Select an adjacent gear when in neutral.

@item initial shift up disengage
@itemx initial shift down disengage
Select an adjacent gear and operate the clutch when in neutral.

@item clutch
Operate the clutch.

@item engage clutch
@itemx disengage clutch
Operate the clutch, except when in neutral

@item initial engage clutch
@itemx initial disengage clutch
Operate the clutch when in neutral
@end table

A function can be bound to more than one control.  However, when the
simulation is running, the joystick is read after the keys.  If, for
example, you bind the throttle to the up arrow key and to a joystick
axis, the joystick (if present) will override the keyboard.

Similarly, more than one function can be bound to a control.  Each
function is called in turn until one of them returns true.

For shifting, you will likely bind two functions to each shifting
control, one for shifting from neutral (e.g. @code{initial shift up})
and the other for shifting from other gears (e.g. @code{shift up}).
If you bind the clutch to a key or button, rather than a continuous
contral, you will also bind two functions to the clutch controls.  The
reason is that you may want different behavior from the clutch in
these two situations.

When shifting from neutral to first, you will let the clutch out
slowly to get the car started without stalling.  When shifting to
other gears you will operate the clutch more quickly.  You can make
this happen by binding both @code{initial shift up disegnage} and
@code{shift up disengage} to the same key or button, and using a
larger value in the @code{time} tage for @code{initial shift up
disengage}.

@node Dashboard, Cars, Controls, Top
@section Dashboard
@cindex dashboard
Several rows of text are printed along the bottom of the screen to
provide some information about the car, similar to the gauges on a
car's dashboard.  You also get some information that you would not
normally see on a dashboard.  Here's what is shown, going down the
columns, starting on the left.

@table @asis
@item RPM
The engine speed in revolutions per minute.

@item Torque
The current engine torque in Newton-meters.

@item Speed
The car's speed in kilometers per hour.

@item Gear
The currently selected gear.  @samp{N} stands for neutral and
@samp{R} is for reverse.

@item Break and Throttle
The cyan bar shows the current brake setting.  The magenta bar shows the
throttle setting.  These bars are useful for evaluating robot cars.

@item Slip Ratios
The slip ratios for each of the tires as a percentage.  A slip ratio is
the difference between the speed of the contact patch and the road
moving beneath it, divided by the speed of the wheel's hub.  Rolling
without sliding yields a slip ratio of zero.  Locking the wheels results
in a slip ratio of 100%.  Slip ratios are useful for seeing how close
you are to the limit of adhesion.  A ratio of 9% or 10% is usually close
to optimal.

@item Fuel
Amount of fuel remaining in liters.

@item Air Density
The current density of the air that the car is driving through.  This
number decreases in another car's slipstream.

@item Lap Time
The elapsed time for the current lap.

@item Last
The time taken to complete the previous lap and the difference between
this time and the best time.

@item Best
The shortest lap time so far.

@item frame/s
The current frame rate.

@item Sector
The number of the current timing sector and the elapsed time for that
sector.

@item Best
The best time for the current sector.

@item Last Sector
The time taken to complete the previous sector and the difference
between this time and the best time for that sector.

@item Distance
The distance from the start/finish line in meters.
@end table

@node Cars, Tracks, Dashboard, Top
@section Cars
@cindex cars
A number of different car definitions are provided.  The car can be
selected with @command{-c <car>} or @command{--car=<car>}, where
@command{<car>} is one of the following

@table @file
@item F1
A modern Formula One car.

@item F1-1967
A late sixties Formula One car.  For reasons I don't yet understand,
this car is very difficult to control.

@item front-drive
A front wheel drive car.

@item GT
@itemx default-car
A rear wheel drive sports car.

@item trainer
An under-powered car for beginners.
@end table

@section Car File Format
The car definition goes inside a @code{car} tag.  You can assign a
name to the car with the @code{name} attribute.

@example
@group
<car name="GT">
  ...
</car>
@end group
@end example

The sections below show how the various subsystems are defined.

@subsection Robot Parameters
These settings define the target performance of the robot car.  The
robot will use the specified slip ratio for acceleration.  Deceleration
and lateral acceleration give the performance targets for braking and
cornering on a flat and level road with no aerodynamic assistance.  The
actual targets are adjusted in real time for the slope of the track and
aerodynamic downforce.

Note that these are just targets.  If they are set to values that can't
be achieved by the car the robot will drive the car off the road.

@example
@group
  <robot>
    <slip-ratio>9.0</slip-ratio>
    <deceleration>1.4</deceleration>
    <lateral-acceleration>1.5</lateral-acceleration>
  </robot>
@end group
@end example

@subsection View
The driver's point-of-view is set with the @code{position} tag.  You
may use whatever units you like, as long as you're consistent.
@xref{Units}.  The horizontal field-of-view is set with the
@code{field-width} tag.  The vertical field-of-view is calculated
automatically from the current window geometry.

@example
@group
  <view>
    <position>[ 1.3, 1.0, 0.8 ]</position>
    <field-width>60.0</field-width>
  </view>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Steering

The maximum steering angle is set with the @code{max-angle} tag.  The
@code{exponent} detemines how linear the steering response is.  A
higher number makes the steering less sensitive at small angles.

@example
@group
  <steering>
    <max-angle>10.0</max-angle>
	<exponent>3.0</exponent>
  </steering>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Drivetrain
The drivetrain section defines the engine, clutch, transmission and
differential. 

@example
@group
  <drivetrain>
    <engine>
      ...
    </engine>

    <clutch>
      ...
    </clutch>

    <transmission>
      ...
    </transmission>

    <differential>
      ...
    </differential>
  </drivetrain>
@end group
@end example

The subsections of the drivetrain are described below.

@example
@group
    <engine>
	  <position>[ 1.5, 1.0, 0.2 ]</position>
	  <mass>200.0</mass>
      <max-power>3.0e5</max-power>
	  <peak-engine-rpm>8000.0</peak-engine-rpm>
	  <rpm-limit>10000.0</rpm-limit>
	  <inertia>0.10</inertia>
	  <idle>0.05</idle>
	  <start-rpm>1000</start-rpm>
	  <stall-rpm>500</stall-rpm>
	  <fuel-consumption>0.0001</fuel-consumption>

      <sound>
        <file>engine.wav</file>
		<pitch>0.01</pitch>
		<volume>0.8</volume>
		<throttle-volume-factor>1.0</throttle-volume-factor>
		<engine-speed-volume-factor>0.001</engine-speed-volume-factor>
	  </sound>
    </engine>
@end group
@end example

The @code{position} and @code{mass} parameters affect the weight
distribution of the car.  The torque curve is calculated from
@code{max-power} and @code{peak-engine-rpm} using a polynomial
expression given in @cite{Motor Vehicle Dynamics, Genta (1997)}, where
@code{peak-engine-rpm} is the engine speed at which the maximum power
output (@code{max-power}) is achieved.  A rev limit can be set with
@code{rpm-limit}.  The rotational inertia of the moving parts is
@code{inertia}.  @code{idle} is the throttle position at idle.
Starting the engine initially sets the engine speed to
@code{start-rpm}.  Letting the engine speed drop below
@code{stall-rpm} makes the engine stall.  The rate of fuel
consumption is set with @code{fuel-consumption}.

The engine sound is set in the @code{sound} section.  @code{file} is
the name of a WAV file in the @file{data/sounds} directory.
@code{throttle-volume-factor} and @code{engine-speed-volume-factor}
determine how the loudness of the sound changes.

@example
@group
    <clutch>
      <sliding>0.5</sliding>
	  <radius>0.25</radius>
	  <area>0.2</area>
	  <max-pressure>1.0e4</max-pressure>
    </clutch>
@end group
@end example

The torque on the clutch is found by dividing the clutch pressure by
the value in the @code{area} tag and multiplying by the @code{radius}
and @code{sliding} (friction) parameters. 

The gear ratios can be defined in two different ways inside the
@code{transmission} tag.  The ratios can be defined individually as in
the example below.  The first number inside the brackets is the gear
(-1 is reverse), and the second is the clutch speed divided by the
driveshaft speed.

@example
@group
    <transmission>
	  <gear-ratio>[ -1, -2.69 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <gear-ratio>[ 1, 2.53 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <gear-ratio>[ 2, 1.71 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <gear-ratio>[ 3, 1.42 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <gear-ratio>[ 4, 1.19 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <gear-ratio>[ 5, 1.04 ]</gear-ratio>
	  <shift-delay>0.2</shift-delay>
    </transmission>
@end group
@end example

Alternatively, the number of gears and the highest and lowest ratios
can be specified.   The other gears will be calculate such that the
reciprocals of the ratios are equally spaced.

@example
@group
    <transmission>
	  <forward-gears>5</forward-gears>
	  <first-ratio>3.21</first-ratio>
	  <last-ratio>1.10</last-ratio>
	  <shift-delay>0.2</shift-delay>
    </transmission>
@end group
@end example

The @code{shift-delay} tag tells how long it takes to change gears.
For a paddle-shifter, like a modern Formula One car,
@code{shift-delay} can be set to zero.

@subsection Fuel Tank
The fuel tank's position, the current volume of fuel and the density
of the fuel affect the car's weight distribution.  The @code{capacity}
tag sets the maximum volume of fuel that the tank can hold.  The
initial volume is set with the @code{volume} tag.  The density of the
fuel is set with @code{fuel-density}.

@example
@group
  <fuel-tank>
    <position>[ 1.00, 1.00, 0.25 ]</position>
	<capacity>100.0</capacity>
	<volume>100.0</volume>
	<fuel-density>0.8</fuel-density>
  </fuel-tank>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Wheels
The @code{wheel} section contains information about the suspension,
tire, and brakes as well as the wheel itself.  The @code{side} and
@code{end} attributes tell where the wheel is located.  The values of
these attributes are important.

The @code{steered} tag tells that the wheel responds to steering
input.  The @code{driven} tag tells that torque from the engine is
applied to the wheel.  Only two wheels may have a @code{steered} tag,
and only two may have a @code{driven} tag.

@example
@group
  <wheel side="right" end="front">
    <steered/>
    <driven/>
    <position>[ 3.0, 0.05, -0.1 ]</position>
	<mass>30.0</mass>
	<restitution>0.1</restitution>
    <suspension>
      ...
    </suspension>
    <tire>
      ...
    </tire>
    <brakes>
      ...
    </brakes>
  <wheel>
@end group
@end example

Values set in one wheel section are persistent; if you want the same
value for another wheel, you do not need set it.

The suspension, tire, and brakes sections are described below.

@subsection Suspension
@example
@group
    <suspension>
	  <position>[ 3.0, 0.35, -0.1 ]</position>
	  <hinge>[ 2.0, 0.35, 0.3 ]</hinge>
	  <spring-constant>22000.0</spring-constant>
	  <bounce>2000.0</bounce>
	  <rebound>2000.0</rebound>
	  <travel>0.4</travel>
	  <max-compression-velocity>10.0</max-compression-velocity>
	  <camber>-2.0</camber>
	  <caster>5.0</caster>
	  <toe>-2.0</toe>
	</suspension>
@end group
@end example

The @code{hinge} is the center of the wheel's path as the suspension
moves.  The location of the hinge is determined by suspension
geometry, and may be outside of the car itself.  Currently, this
parameter has no effect of performance.  It may be used in the future
for configuring anti-dive and anti-squat suspension geometries.

@code{bounce} and @code{rebound} are the damping coefficients for
compression and expansion of the suspension, respectively.  If the
speed at which the suspension is compressed, or expanded exceeds the
value in @code{max-compression-velocity}, the dampers ``lock up.''  

Wheel alignment is set with the @code{camber}, @code{caster}, and
@code{toe} tags.  All angles are in degrees.

@subsection Tires
The @code{longitudinal}, @code{transverse}, and @code{aligning}
section each contain a vector of ``magic formula'' coefficients as
presented in @cite{Motor Vehicle Dynamics, Genta (1997)}.  The two
elements of @code{rolling-resistance} are the constant and
velocity-squared terms, respectively.

@example
@group
	<tire>
      <friction>
        <longitudinal>
          [ 1.65, 0.0, 1690.0, 0.0, 229.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, -10.0, 0.0, 0.0 ]
        </longitudinal>
	    <transverse>
	      [ 1.80, 0.0, 1690.0, 800.0, 6.03, 0.0, -0.359, 1.0, 0.0, -6.11e-3, -3.22e-2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0 ]
	    </transverse>
	    <aligning>
	      [ 2.07, -6.49, -21.9, 0.416, -21.3, 2.94e-2, 0.0, -1.20, 5.23, -14.8, 0.0, 0.0, -3.74e-3, 3.89e-2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.639, 1.69 ]
	    </aligning>
	  </friction>
	  <radius>0.310</radius>
      <rolling-resistance>[ 1.3e-2, 6.5e-6 ]</rolling-resistance>
	  <rotational-inertia>10.0</rotational-inertia>
    </tire>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Brakes
@example
@group
    <brakes>
	  <friction>0.8</friction>
	  <max-pressure>2.0e6</max-pressure>
      <front-bias>0.55</front-bias>
	  <radius>0.2</radius>
	  <area>0.01</area>
    </brakes>
@end group
@end example

@code{front-bias} is the fraction of braking pressure applied to the
front brakes.

@subsection Particles and Contact Points
Particles affect the mass distribution of the car.

@example
@group
  <particle>
    <position>[ 2.0, 1.0, 0.5 ]</position>
	<mass>100.0</mass>
  </particle>
@end group
@end example

Contact points are particles that participate in collisions.  The
material specified in the @code{material} tag (either ``metal'' or
``rubber'') determines the sound made when contact is detected.  The
coefficients of friction and restitution are set with the
@code{friction} and @code{restitution} tags, respectively.

@example
@group
  <contact-point>
    <mass>40.0</mass>
    <position>[ 0.0, 0.0, 0.0 ]</position>
	<material>metal</material>
	<friction>0.5</friction>
	<restitution>0.1</restitution>
  </contact-point>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Drag and Wings
The aerodynamic properties of the car are determined by the
@code{drag} and @code{wing} sections.  The frontal area and
coefficient of drag, set it @code{frontal-area} and
@code{drag-coefficient}, are used to calculate the drag force.

@example
@group
  <drag>
    <position>[ 2.0, 1.0, 0.25 ]</position>
	<frontal-area>2.0</frontal-area>
	<drag-coefficient>0.3</drag-coefficient>
  </drag>
@end group
@end example

Downforce can be added with wings.  The amount of downforce is
determined by the value in the @code{lift-coefficient} tag.  If the
lift coefficient is positive, upforce is generated.  This is usually
undesirable for cars.  The @code{efficiency} determines how much drag
is added as downforce increases.  The @code{surface-area} is the
surface area of the wing.  This value is also used in the drag
calculation.

@example
@group
  <wing>
    <position>[ 0.0, 0.9, 0.5 ]</position>
	<frontal-area>0.2</frontal-area>
	<surface-area>0.5</surface-area>
	<lift-coefficient>-4.0</lift-coefficient>
	<efficiency>0.5</efficiency>
  </wing>
@end group
@end example

@node Tracks, Worlds, Cars, Top
@section Tracks
@cindex tracks
Once you get bored with the default, you might want to try driving on
some different tracks.  The track can be selected using command line
arguments.  Use either @command{vamos -t <track>} or @command{vamos
--track==<track>}, where @command{<track>}, is the name of one of the
XML files in the @file{data/tracks} directory.  There are files for
almost all of the Formula One circuits for the past couple of decades,
plus a few more.  These include

@table @file
@item drag
A striaight flat strip of road.

@item Monza
The high-speed Italian circuit.

@item Peanut
@itemx default-track
A simple track.

@item Road_Atlanta
The Georgia-shaped track in Georgia.

@item Silverstone
The home of the British grand prix.

@item skid_pad
A cirular track for testing handling.

@item Spa
The Spa-Francorchamps track in Belgium.

@item Suzuka
The track for many Japanase Grands Prix.
@end table

You can use the @command{trk-convert} program to turn a track file for
RARS (Robot Auto Racing @url{http://rars.sourceforge.net}) into a
C++ track file for Vamos.  The converted files usually need
some adjusting, so you'll have to learn a little about Vamos track
files.

@section Track File Format

Tracks are defined in XML files.  Here's the beginning of a track
file. 

@example
@group
<track name="Peanut">
  <racing-line show="0">
    <iterations>800</iterations>
    <stiffness>1.0</stiffness>
    <damping>0.01</damping>
    <margin>1.6</margin>
    <resolution>14.0</resolution>
  </racing-line>
@end group
@end example

@subsection Racing Line
The racing line section is optional.  A good line is calculated for
almost all tracks using the default parameters (shown).  Changing the
@code{show} parameter to 1 will cause the racing line to be drawn on the
track.  However, the @command{-l} option is a more convenient way to do
this.

Use more iterations if the racing line does not converge to something
reasonable.  You can try fewer to reduce the calculation time.

The racing line is calculated by simulating a chain of masses with springs
that tend to straighten the chain.  Stiffness sets the spring constant.
Damping prevents runaway oscillation.

The margin is how close to the edge of the road the line is allowed to
get.

Resolution is the distance between masses.  This parameter defaults to
the width of the road at the starting line.

The racing line can be modified by the tags
@code{racing-line-adjustment} and @code{curvature-factor} in the
@code{road}.  See below.

@subsection The Sky Box

@example
@group
  <sky>
    <sides>textures/sky_sides.png</sides>
	<top>textures/sky_top.png</top>
	<bottom>textures/sky_bottom.png</bottom>
	<smooth/>
  </sky>
@end group
@end example

The @code{sky} section describes the sky box, which is a cube onto which
a background is mapped.  The @code{sides} image is wrapped around the
front, right, back, and left sides of the sky box.  The optional
@code{smooth} tag can improve the quality of the sky box images.

@subsection Materials

After the sky box, the properties of the various materials that make
up the track are defined.

@example
@group
  <material name="track" type="asphalt">
	<friction>1.0</friction>
	<restitution>0.1</restitution>
	<rolling>1.0</rolling>
	<drag>0.0</drag>
	<bump-amplitude>0.01</bump-amplitude>
	<bump-wavelength>100.0</bump-wavelength>
	<texture>
	  <file>textures/track2.png</file>
	  <length>200.0</length>
	  <smooth/>
	  <mipmap/>
	</texture>
  </material>
@end group
@end example

The name is used to identify the material in other parts of the file.
The type helps determine what sound is played.  The type must be one
of rubber, metal, asphalt, concrete, grass, gravel, or dirt.

The @code{friction} tag sets the relative friction of the surface.
If, for example, you want to specify another surface that has half the
friction of asphalt, you whould set the friction value to 0.5.  The
calculation of the actual frictional force involves the car.
Similarly, relative values of the coefficient of restitution, rolling
resistance, and velocity-dependent drag are set with the
@code{restitution}, @code{rolling}, and @code{drag} tags.

The bumpiness of the surface is set with the @code{bump-amplitude},
and @code{bump-wavelength} tags.  They define a sinusiodal variation
in the track's elevation.  You may use whatever units you like, as
long as you're consistent.  @xref{Units}.

The texture image is set in the @code{texture} section.  The file is
the name of a PNG image file.  The physical size that the image covers
is set with the @code{length} and @code{width} tags.  In this example,
the @code{width} tag is omitted.   As a result, the texture is
stretched to fit the width of the track.
 
The @code{smooth} and @code{mipmap} tags improve the quality of the
images, but they also reduce the frame rate. 

@subsection Segments

The materials are grouped into ``segments'' that describe the
materials for the track, kerbs, shoulders, and barriers.

@example
@group
  <segment name="left turn">
    [ wall grass kerb track kerb gravel tires ]
  </segment>
@end group
@end example

The name is used to identify the segment in other parts of the file.
Inside the @code{segment} tag is an array of material names.  The
material of the right-side barrier (as seen from a car traveling
forward around the track) is first.

@subsection Track Geometry

The track is made up of @code{road} sections.  Here is a simple
@code{road} section 

@example
@group
  <road segment="left turn">
    <resolution>5.0</resolution>
	<length>130.0</length>
	<radius>160.0</radius>
  </road>
@end group
@end example

The @code{segment} attribute names a list of materials defined earlier
in the file.  The @code{resolution} sets the size of the quadrilateral
divisions in the road section.  The smaller the resolution, the more
closely the section approximates a smooth curve.  The length and width
are given in meters.  However, any system of units can be used as long
as they are used consistently throughout the simulation for both
derived and fundamental quantities.

The first road section must set the width of the track and shoulder,
and also the height of the barriers.  These dimensions are specified
as (distance, width) pairs.  Any number of pairs may be specified for
a given width,  the program will interpolate linearly between
specified points.

@example
@group
  <!-- front straight -->
  <road segment="straight pit">
    <resolution>10.0</resolution>
	<length>100.0</length>
	<left-width>[ 0.0, 25.0 ]</left-width>
	<right-width>[ 0.0, 25.0 ]</right-width>
	<left-road-width>[ 0.0, 8.0 ]</left-road-width>
	<right-road-width>[ 0.0, 8.0 ]</right-road-width>
	<left-wall-height>2.0</left-wall-height>
	<right-wall-height>2.0</right-wall-height>
	<elevation>[ 20.0, 0.0 ]</elevation>
	<elevation>[ 200.0, 5.0 ]</elevation>
  </road>
@end group
@end example

Similarly, any number of elevation points may be specified.  A spline
is used to interpolate between elevation points to achieve smooth
elevation changes.

The @code{racing-line-adjustment} adjusts the edges of the track left
(positive) or right (negative) for the purpose of calculating the racing
line.  It is often useful to do this to shift the line toward the edge
of the track so that the robot cars will run onto the kerbs.

If the cars go too fast or too slow for on a particular segment, the
@code{curvature-factor} can be specified to make the robots think the
racing line is curved more or less than it actually is.  The actual
curvature is multiplied by this number.  If it's greater than one the
cars will go slower; if it's less they'll go faster.

@subsection Braking Markers

Braking markers are signs that show the distance to an upcoming turn.
For turns approached a high speed, markers at 150 m, 100 m, and 50 m
are typically shown.

@example
@group
  <road>
    ...
	<braking-marker>
	  <file>textures/50.png</file>
	  <distance>50.0</distance>
	  <size>[ 1.4, 0.7 ]</size>
	  <offset>[ 2.0, 0.0 ]</offset>
	  <side>right</side>
	</braking-marker>
	<braking-marker>
	  <file>textures/100.png</file>
	  <distance>100.0</distance>
	</braking-marker>
	<braking-marker>
	  <file>textures/150.png</file>
	  <distance>150.0</distance>
	</braking-marker>
    ...
  </road>
@end group
@end example

Once the size and offset parameters have been set, they do not need to
be specified again unless you want to use different values.

@subsection Kerbs

Concrete kerbs are often placed along the insides of curves, and on
the opposite side at the curve exits.  I'm not really sure why.
Nonetheless, kerbs can be specified in the road sections.

@example
@group
  <road>
    ...
	<left-kerb>
	  <start>
        <distance>10.0</distance>
		<transition>
		  <length>4.0</length>
		  <width>1.0</width>
		</transition>
	  </start>
	  <end>
        <distance>100.0</distance>
		<transition>
		  <length>4.0</length>
		  <width>1.0</width>
		</transition>
	  </end>
	  <profile>[ 1.0, 0.1 ][ 3.0, 0.1 ][ 3.1, 0.0 ]</profile>
	</left-kerb>

    <right-kerb>
      ...
    </right-kerb>
    ...
  </road>
@end group
@end example

Each road section can have a left-side and a right-side kerb.  A set
of coordinates of the form [ distance-from-edge-of-track,
elevation-above-track ] set the shape of the kerb in the
@code{profile} tag.  A [ 0.0, 0.0 ] coordinate is inserted
automatically. 

The @code{start} and @code{end} tags tell where and how the kerb begins
and ends.  If the distance is positive it is relative to the beginning
of the road section.  If it's negative it is measured from the end.  The
distance may be omitted for either or both ends.  The default start and
end distances are zero and the end of the track, respectively.

The @code{transition} section tells how the ends of the kerb are capped.
In the example above, the kerb tapers down track level and a width of
1.0 m in a distance of 4.0 m.  The transition does not add length to the
kerb.  The @code{start} and @code{end} tags specify the endpoints of the
kerb including the transitions.

If the @code{end} tag is omitted on one segment and the @code{start} tag
is omitted on the next, the kerb will run seamlessly across the segment
boundary.  If the kerb should run through the segment and connect with
kerbs on the next and previous segments an empty tag
(@code{<left-kerb/>} or @code{<right-kerb/>}) will do.

Once the transition length and width, and the profile are set they do
not need to be specified again unless you want to use different
values.  You can use @code{<transition/>} to specify a transition with
the previously set values.  For example, this kerb runs the entire
length of its road section and is capped with transitions at both
ends.

@example
@group
    <right-kerb>
	  <start><transition/></start>
	  <end><transition/></end>
    </right-kerb>
@end group
@end example

If there's no @code{start} tag, the kerb starts at the beginning of
the road section with no transition.  If there's to @code{end}, the
kerb ends at the end of the road section.  To make the kerb join
smoothly across two road sections, omit the @code{end} in the first
section, and omit the @code{start} in the second.

Kerbs are typically serrated.  Again, I don't know why.  This can be
simulated by setting the bump parameters on the kerb material defined
near the beginning of the track file. 

@subsection Closing a Circuit
Adjusting a track to make meet the beginning seamlessly is tedious.
If a @code{<circuit/>} tag is included, the program will make the
adjustments automatically.  You can specify how many of the last
segments will be adjusted with the @code{segments} attribute.  For
example, with @code{<circuit segments="2"/>} only the last two
segments will be changed.  Note the quotes around the value (required
by the XML standard) and the trailing slash.

Allowed values for the @code{segments} tag are 0, 1, 2, and 3.  The
default is 3.  

@table @file
@item 3
Adjust the length of the next-to-last segment (which must be a curve),
to make the last segment parallel to the first.  Adjust the length of
the third-to-last segment (which must be straight) to put the last
segment in line with the first.  Adjust the length of the last segment
so that it meets the beginning of the first.

@item 2
Adjust the radius and length of the next-to-last segment to align the
last with the first.  Adjust the length of the last segment
so that it meets the beginning of the first.

@item 1
Adjust the length of the last segment so that it meets the beginning
of the first.

@item 0
Adjust nothing.
@end table

In all cases (including 0) the elevation curve is forced to close.

If the track can not be closed with the specified adjustments, or the
requirements about what segments must be stright or curved, the
exception @code{Vamos_Track::Can_Not_Close} is thrown.

@node Worlds, Units, Tracks, Top
@section Worlds
The ``world'' specifies various environmental factors.  Here's the
entire default world file.

@example
@group
<world name="Earth">
  <!-- Acceleration due to gravity -->
  <gravity>9.8</gravity>

  <maximum-time-step>0.01</maximum-time-step>

  <atmosphere>
    <!-- Air density -->
	<density>1.2</density>
	<!-- Wind velocity -->
    <velocity>[ 0.0, 0.0, 0.0 ]</velocity>
  </atmosphere>

  <lighting>
    <!-- Direction to the light source -->
    <source-position>[ 0.0, -1.0, 1.0 ]</source-position>
	<!-- RGB for ambient light -->
	<ambient>[ 0.7 , 0.7, 0.7 ]</ambient>
  </lighting>
</world>
@end group
@end example

Here is a description of the sections.

@table @code
@item gravity
Acceleration due to gravity.  The typical value for Earth is 9.8
m/s^2.

@item maximum-time-step
Each frame in the simulation will be sub-divided into time steps no
larger than this value.  If you see jitter when the car is stopped,
try lowering the maximum time step.  However, you may take a
performance hit, if the value is too small.

@item atmosphere
Density of the air and wind velocity.

@item lighting
Light source position and ambient light level.
@end table

Other world files can be specified with the @command{--world=} or
@command{-w} options.  Just for fun, a world file for the moon is
provided.  

@c=============================================================================
@node Units, Code Reference, Worlds, Top
@chapter Units
@cindex units

A number that describes a physical quantity is meaningless unless the
units of measure are given.  If we have a length of 20, we don't know
if it's 20 meters, 20 feet, or 20 light years.  Despite this fact,
there are no units specified in Vamos.

Consider the fundamental quantities to be time, length, and mass.
From these, you can derive the units for any quantity used in the
simulation.  For instance, the units on velocity are a length unit
divided by a time unit.  Force units are mass times length divided by
time squared.  As long as the fundamental and derived units are
consistent, it does not matter what base units are used.

There's one exception.  Since the simulation relies on library
functions for timing information, and these libraries use seconds, the
unit of time must be seconds.

I always use SI (metric) units because it's easy to keep the base and
derived units consistent.  The SI base units are the meter (m) for
length and kilogram (kg) for mass.  Power is derived quantity with
units of Watts.  A Watt is a kg*m^2/s^3.  If you use feet and slugs as
your base unit, then your power will be in slug*ft^2/s^3; you can't
simply use horsepower.

Derived units used in the simulation are

@itemize @bullet
@item area (distance^2)

@item volume (distance^3)

@item speed (distance/time)

@item acceleration (distance/time^2)

@item force (mass*acceleration)

@item torque (force*distance)

@item engine power (force*distance/time)

@item spring constant (force/distance)

@item damping (force/speed)

@item density (mass/volume)
@end itemize

There are some places where non-SI units are used.  All angles are
specified in degrees.  Engine speeds are specified in rotations per
minute (RPM).  The coefficients for tire friction have their customary
units.

@c=============================================================================
@node Code Reference, Building Vamos, Units, Top
@chapter Code Reference

The code is devided into four modules that reside in four namespaces,
@code{Vamos_Geometry}, @code{Vamos_Body}, @code{Vamos_Track} and
@code{Vamos_World}.  Each namespace contains the code for a library.
These libraries are @code{libvamos-geometry}, @code{libvamos-body},
@code{libvamos-track}, and @code{libvamos-world}.  The geometry library
has classes for vectors, matrices and curves.  The body library has a
class for a rigid body and classes for a car and its parts.  It also has
other classes that are needed by more than one of the other libraries.
The track library has the classes needed for building a track.  The
world library handles a rigid body's interaction with the track.

@menu
* The Geometry Library::        Vectors, matrices, curves, etc.
* The Media Library::           Code for sound, images, 3D models.
* The Track Library::           The driving surface.
* The Body Library::            Cars and other rigid bodies.
* The World Library::           The world mediates interactions.
@end menu

The geometry library is used by both the body and world libraries.  The
body library is used by the world library.  The dependency graph looks
like this:
@example
@group
           libvamos-geometry
              /    |
             /     |
  libvamos-media   |
             \     |
              \    |
               ----+----          
              /    |    \
             /     |     \
  libvamos-track   |   libvamos-body
             \     |     /
              \    |    /
            libvamos-world

@end group
@end example
Libraries farther down the graph depend on the libraries above them.  If
you only need the services of the geometry library, then you only have
one library to link.  If you use the body library, then you need to link
the geometry and media libraries as well.  If you use the world library,
then you need to link all five.  When linking multiple libraries you may
need to make sure that @code{libvamos-geometry} is linked first,
followed by @code{libvamos-body}, and then @code{libvamos-world}.  If
you get errors from the linker about undefined references to functions
defined in one of these libraries, then you may have to adjust the link
order.

Care was taken to avoid a dependency of @code{libvamos-track} on
@code{libvamos-body} and vice versa.  This allows cars and tracks to
tested independently.

@node The Geometry Library, The Media Library, , Code Reference
@section The Geometry Library
@cindex geometry library
@cindex @code{Vamos_Geometry}
@cindex @file{libvamos-geometry}

The geometry module is a collection of mathematical constants,
functions, and objects.  There are also a few less mathematical classes
that are required by more than one other module.  This is done to avoid
dependency problems.

@section Three_Vector
@cindex @code{Three_Vector}
@cindex vector
A @code{Three_Vector} represents a vector in three dimensions.  Some
supported operations are

@itemize @bullet
@item subscripting using @code{[]}

@item vector addition and subtraction using @code{+} and @code{-}

@item multiplication and division by a scalar using @code{*} and @code{/}

@item left and right matrix multiplication using @code{*}

@item dot and cross products using the @code{dot()} and @code{cross()}methods

@item projection onto another vector using the @code{project()} method

@item magnitude using the @code{abs()} method
@end itemize

Matrix multiplication is done with a @code{Three_Matrix}.

@section Three_Matrix
@cindex @code{Three_Matrix}
@cindex matrix

A @code{Three_Matrix} represents 3x3 matrix.  It's suitable for
representing a three-dimensional rotation matrix or inertia tensor.
Some suported operations are

@itemize @bullet
@item subscripting using @code{[]}

@item matrix addition and subtraction using @code{+} and @code{-}

@item multiplication and division by a scalar using @code{*} and @code{/}

@item left and right vector multiplication using @code{*}

@item matrix multiplication using @code{*}

@item eigenvalue and eigenvector determination

@item inversion
@end itemize

@section Inertia_Tensor
@cindex @code{Inertia_Tensor}
@cindex inertia tensor
An inertia tensor is a matrix that describes a rigid body's responce
to torques.  The @code{Inertia_Tensor} generates the tensor from the
locations of masses on a body.  The masses and positions are specified
using the @code{add()} method.  The @code{inertia()} method returns
the moment of inertia for a force applied at a particular point on the
body. 

@section Two_Point
@cindex @code{Two_Point}
@cindex point
A @code{Two_Point} describes a point in a plane.  It is a @code{struct}
with two data members, @code{x} and @code{y}.  A constructor is provided
for initializing the members.  No vector operations are supported, and
some of the supported operations are undefined for vectors.  That's why
this class is called @code{Two_Point} and not @code{Two_Vector}.  The
supported operations are scalar and member-wise addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division.  For the scalar versions, the operation is
performed on each member.

@code{Spline} is the only user of @code{Two_Point}.  Perhaps it should
be defined in @code{Spline}'s header so that there's less temptation to
use @code{Two_Point} inappropriately.

@section Spline
@cindex @code{Spline}
@cindex spline
@code{Spline} is a class for a parametric cubic spline interpolation
between points.  A vector of @code{Two_Point}s through which the curve
passes and angle of the curve at the first and last points are passed to
the constructor.

@code{Spline}s are used to make smooth road elevation changes and banking
transitions.

@section Surface
@cindex @code{surface}
A @code{Surface} describes the friction, rolling resistance, restitution
and texture image of a surface such as pavement, grass or gravel.

@section Texture_Image
@cindex @code{Texture_Image}
@cindex texture
@cindex image
The @code{Texture Image} class provides a convenient way of reading a
@file{*.ppm} image file from the disk and for getting information about
the image.

@section Conversions
@cindex @code{Conversions}
The header file @file{Conversions.h} contains a few functions for
performing frequently-used unit conversions.  Currently, there are
conversions for radians and degress, radians per second and revolutions
per minute, and meters per second and kilometers per hour. 

@node The Media Library, The Track Library, The Geometry Library, Code Reference
@section The Media Library
@cindex media library
@cindex @code{Vamos_Media}
@cindex @file{libvamos-media}

@node The Track Library, The Body Library, The Media Library, Code Reference
@section The Track Library
@cindex track library
@cindex @code{Vamos_Track}
@cindex @file{libvamos-track}

A @code{Track} is a collection of straight and curved pieces of road.
These pieces are described by classes derived from @code{Road_Segment}.
Currently, we have a straight segment class (@code{Straight_Road}), and
a circle arc segment class (@code{Arc_Road}).  The track is assembled so
that there are no corners where two segments join.

If you look at the code you'll find a class for a segment that smoothly
curves through a set of given points (@code{Spline_Road}).  This class
has been commented out because I don't know how to do the transformation
from world coordinates to track coordinates for a spline.

The elevation and banking at any number of points on a segment can be
specified.  The specified points are interpolated with a cubic spline so
that the transitions are smooth.

@example
@group
Track o---Road_Segment
           ^     ^
          /       \
Straight_Road    Arc_Road
@end group
@end example

@node The Body Library, The World Library, The Track Library, Code Reference
@section The Body Library
@cindex body library
@cindex @code{Vamos_Body}
@cindex @file{libvamos-body}
@cindex @code{Body}
@cindex @code{Particle}
@cindex @code{Frame}
@cindex @code{Car}

A @code{Body} describes a three-dimensional rigid body made up of point
particles.  These particles are described by @code{Particle} and its
subclasses.  Position and orientation for both @code{Body}s and
@code{Particle}s is provided by the @code{Frame} base class.  The
@code{Car} class is derived from @code{Body}

@example
@group
     Frame
     ^   ^
    /     \
 Body o---Particle
  ^
  |
 Car
@end group
@end example

@menu
* Frame::                       A coordinate system.
* Particle::                    A body is made up of point particles.
* Body::                        A rigid body.
* Car::                         A drivable body.
@end menu

@node Frame
@subsection Frame

@node Particle
@subsection Particle

@node Body
@subsection Body

@node Car
@subsection Car

@subsubsection Drivetrain

@subsubsection Wheel


@node The World Library,  , The Body Library, Code Reference
@section The World Library
@cindex world library
@cindex @code{Vamos_World}
@cindex @file{libvamos-world}

To avoid dependencies, @code{Track}, @code{Atmosphere}, and
@code{Body} were each designed so that they know nothing about the
others.  It is the purpose of the @code{World} class to mediate any
interactions among those classes.  Because @code{Track},
@code{Atmosphere}, and @code{Body} are independent, it is neccessary
that @code{World} depend on each of these classes.  A subclass of
@code{World} that provides an interface to the input methods of
@code{Car} is provided.  It's called @code{Car_World}.  (Apologies to
Marcus Hewat, creator of the Carworld program,
@url{http://perso.club-internet.fr/hewat/carworld/carworld.htm}.
Aside from some bits of code I stole for reading textures from files
and drawing text on the screen, this project is unrelated to
Carworld.)

@example
@group
        World
       o ^ o o---.
      /  |  \     \
 Track   |  Body  Atmosphere
         |   ^
  Car_World  |
          o  |
           \ |
            Car
@end group
@end example

The @code{World} base class doesn't do any graphics.  If you want to see
the results of the simulation on screen, you must derive an appropriate
class and define the @code{draw()} method.  An example of such a class
that uses OpenGL, @code{Gl_Car_World}, is provided.  You must also use
subclasses of Track and Car (such as @code{Gl_Track} and @code{Gl_Car})
that use the same graphics system if you wish to see instances of those
objects.

A typical application will construct a @code{Track}, @code{Atmosphere},
and @code{Car}, and then construct a @code{World} by passing pointers to those
objects.  The simulation is started by calling the @code{World}'s
@code{start()} method.  The @code{World} is responsible for initializing the
graphics system (if used) and starting the event loop.

@subsection Atmosphere
@cindex @code{Atmosphere}
To be written.

@c=============================================================================
@node Building Vamos, Copying, Code Reference, Top
@appendix Building Vamos
@cindex building

@section Downloading
@cindex downloading
You can get the latest release by going to the Vamos home page,
@url{http://vamos.sourceforge.net}, and following the ``Download''
link.  Another way to get there is to go through the SourceForge
project page, @url{http://sourceforge.net/projects/vamos}.

@section Dependencies
@cindex dependencies
Vamos makes use of some external libraries.  These libraries need to
be present in order to compile Vamos.

OpenGL-compatible libraries, including the OpenGL Utility Library
(GLU) and the OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT) must be installed.  Mesa
@url{http://www.mesa-3d.org} works fine.  In addition, you need
accelerated video hardware.  Some video cards require specific GL
implementations.

SDL @url{http://www.libsdl.org} is used for event handling (keys, mouse,
and joystick).  Sound is handled by OpenAL
@url{http://connect.creativelabs.com/openal}.

You will also need a reasonably up-to-date C++ compiler.  Specifically,
it must handle namespaces.  Gcc version 2.96 and later, including 3.x,
and 4.x should do.  See @url{http://gcc.gnu.org}.  The code is intended
to be portable, standard C++, so other compilers should work as well.

@section Compiling
@cindex compiling
@cindex configure
@cindex installing
After downloading the source archive (the @file{tar.gz} file), unpack
it with the @command{tar} command, or some other utility.  All of the
files in the archive are placed in a subdirectory.  If the
archive is @file{vamos-1.2.3.tar.gz}, the files are placed in
@file{vamos-1.2.3}. 

Vamos uses the GNU Autotools (@command{automake}, @command{autoconf},
and @command{libtool}) to check for prerequisites and handle different
architectures.  Change to the directory created by un-archiving and
type @command{./configure}.  Type @command{./configure --help} to see
the options accepted by @code{configure}.  I have only tried to
compile Vamos on GNU/Linux and Cygwin/Win32 platforms.  Please write
me if you find an architecture that is not handled correctly.

The @command{configure} script generates the @file{Makefile}s needed
to compile the program.  Issue the @command{make} command to start the
compilation.  If you encounter errors, or warnings that you think I
should know about, please contact me.

If the compilation succeeds, you can install the libraries, headers,
and application by typing @command{make install}.  You may need to be
a privileged user to install software on your system.  You do not need
to install the program to run the application.  Switch to the
@file{vamos} directory and run @command{./vamos} to try the
application without installing.

@node Copying, Concept Index, Building Vamos, Top
@appendix Copying
@cindex copying

Vamos may be copied according to the terms of the GNU General Public
License (GNU GPL).  The license is in the file COPYING in the
top-level directory of the source code.

This documentation may be copied according to the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (GNU FDL) which is printed
below. 

@appendixsec GNU Free Documentation License

@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@center Version 1.1, March 2000

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@enumerate 0
@item
PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document @dfn{free} in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@item
APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The ``Document'', below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as ``you''.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not ``Transparent'' is called ``Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
@sc{ascii} without markup, Texinfo input format, La@TeX{} input format,
@acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} using a publicly available
@acronym{DTD}, and standard-conforming simple @acronym{HTML} designed
for human modification.  Opaque formats include PostScript,
@acronym{PDF}, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, @acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} for which
the @acronym{DTD} and/or processing tools are not generally available,
and the machine-generated @acronym{HTML} produced by some word
processors for output purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

@item
VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

@item
COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

@item
MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

@enumerate A
@item
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
(which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
if the original publisher of that version gives permission.

@item
List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).

@item
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher.

@item
Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

@item
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
adjacent to the other copyright notices.

@item
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

@item
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

@item
Include an unaltered copy of this License.

@item
Preserve the section entitled ``History'', and its title, and add to
it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
there is no section entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.

@item
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
it was based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.
You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.

@item
In any section entitled ``Acknowledgments'' or ``Dedications'',
preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgments
and/or dedications given therein.

@item
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

@item
Delete any section entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section
may not be included in the Modified Version.

@item
Do not retitle any existing section as ``Endorsements''
or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
@end enumerate

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties---for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

@item
COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
``History''; likewise combine any sections entitled ``Acknowledgments'',
and any sections entitled ``Dedications''.  You must delete all sections
entitled ``Endorsements.''

@item
COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

@item
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an ``aggregate'', and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.

@item
TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.

@item
TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/}.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
@end enumerate

@page
@appendixsubsec ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@smallexample
@group
  Copyright (C)  @var{year}  @var{your name}.
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with the Invariant Sections being @var{list their titles}, with the
  Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}, and with the Back-Cover Texts being @var{list}.
  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.
@end group
@end smallexample

If you have no Invariant Sections, write ``with no Invariant Sections''
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write ``no Front-Cover Texts'' instead of
``Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}''; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@c Local Variables:
@c ispell-local-pdict: "ispell-dict"
@c End:

@node Concept Index,  , Copying, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
